Good afternoon.
My name is James Dempsey and it is
now 5:00 on day two of that annual
drink from the Apple fire hose known
as the Worldwide Developers Conference.
So is everybody's brain full yet?
good.
We'll try to fix that this afternoon!
So it's been very nice
the past couple of days,
seeing former students who've gone
through our Apple iServices classes,
folks that I've been teaching web
objects to for the past couple of years,
hearing about the stuff that
they've been doing with web objects,
and it's been a lot of fun.
So again,
other former students who haven't
said hi after the class -- or after
the class -- after the session,
feel free to say hey.
All right,
so today we're going to talk about
the Enterprise Objects Framework.
Before we begin, though,
I need to take a couple of polls,
and I want you to respond with loudest,
thunderous applause you can if
the question applies to you.
So first,
how many folks were here yesterday
for Steve Heyman's introduction to
the Web Objects Technology Session?
So
And it's very obvious that it was
a session that you're all very
disappointed in from your response.
That, I just cannot wait until that
is out on DVD because I think
it's going to just bump
Austin Powers off of the list for me.
If not that, it's going to do it to Dude,
Where's My Car?
So I'm not sure which.
So we're here to talk about web objects.
The second thing I wanted to pull
you on is how many of you consider
yourself either brand new or
relatively uncertain or a novice in
the Enterprise Objects Framework?
Again, with a round of applause.
which is a good size of the audience,
which is very good because that's
what we're going to be talking about.
Now let's begin.
The introduction,
this is an introduction to the
Enterprise Objects Framework which
is more succinctly known as EOF.
And what we're going to be talking about
today in Steve Hammond's preso yesterday,
we saw that WebObjects and
EOF can be a lot of fun.
He was wiring stuff up,
they got maps flying all over the place.
And the question you may ask yourself is,
is all this stuff really that easy?
And the answer is actually yes and no.
So, yes it is, if you are doing
traditional database stuff,
inserting stuff, fetching stuff out,
creating new objects,
the answer is no if you start having
to do very complicated things.
Like you come into a situation
where they have a legacy database
that's been there for the past 10
years and they're encoding all this
information in the primary key.
And so you have to generate primary
keys with EOF and then other situations
where they need you to interact
with some system that was designed
before people had any common sense.
And so you have to do all these
contorted things to get things to work.
And in those cases, you know what?
Without even EOF in the picture,
it's just hard.
Now, the nice thing about EOF is
that it allows you to solve
those almost impossible problems
Is it easy?
No.
But are they incredibly hard problems?
Yes.
And does EOF let you do it with, with,
with grace, style, panache,
and without writing too much code?
Definitely.
So that's what we're going to talk about.
Now what are we going to
learn in this session?
The first thing we're going
to learn about is why EOF?
Anyway, what's the purpose?
What do I get?
Why am I in this session?
What's going on here?
The second thing we're going to talk
about is just a conceptual model
about EOF and how it works because
we've seen things flying out of
databases on the web pages today and
yesterday and for the rest of the week.
But I always get a little suspicious
when it seems a little too magic-y.
So we're going to demystify a little
bit of just what's going on there.
We're not going to go
into excruciating detail.
Finally, we're going to do practical code
for basic database operations.
Now, yesterday, Steve Heyman,
a proud Canadian,
He said that Canadians,
they don't need wizards.
They don't need assistants.
He was going to use a display
group to fetch things.
It's a little known fact,
but a true fact that I am half Canadian.
My father immigrated to this
country during the great
Molson Beer famine of 1958.
And he took the arduous journey,
20 minute journey in his car
to Maine and never returned.
Except to visit family and friends.
Mainly because he liked the
idea of Molson being imported.
So that said,
I have the Canadian blood of my
father racing through my veins,
yet I'm also a rugged
individualist American who
doesn't need a display group.
And so therefore,
what we're going to do in this is
we're going to see the programmatic
code that actually a display group
is using behind the scenes and expose
another level of the magic of EOF.
So that's what we're doing.
Now where does this all
fit into the big picture?
EOF is actually a slight misnomer in that
there are a number of frameworks in EOF.
The two that we're focusing on
are EO Access and EO Control.
And these are frameworks that they
form the core of database access if
you're doing HTML based WebObjects apps,
Cocoa apps, Java client apps,
direct to Java client apps,
direct to Web apps.
Anything that you see in any of
these sessions that is hitting a
database is using the frameworks
we're going to talk about.
Alright, that said,
if you are a very good piano player,
imagine you have never played
the piano before in your life.
And for those of you who are either not
very good piano players like myself,
or never seen a piano before,
Imagine being walked up to a
piano and handed a piece of
music that looks like this.
You'd probably say, "Uh, okay."
It looks very complicated,
it looks very daunting,
it looks like how am I ever
going to sit down and do this?
But we know from experience,
we know that there are people in the
world who can sit down at a piano
and play this very piece of music.
We know walking up to a piano
that it's in there somewhere,
I just don't know how to get it out.
It's just like EOF.
Because we know from the many years
that EOF has been in production in the
largest companies around the world,
we know that EOF is able to solve
some problems that would make
your head literally explode.
Oh, I've heard stories.
But,
just like you don't want to hand this
piece of sheet music to somebody the
very first time they sit down at a piano,
you don't want to do this,
those extraordinary complicated things,
the very first time you deal with EOF.
We know anybody who's gone down the
little trail of learning to play
the piano knows that you start here.
Okay, and you say, "Oh,
how disappointing." But we know that
when you're starting to play the piano,
somebody tells you, "Take this thumb,
put it on this key called middle C,
and then just kind of walk up the
scale." Those are the fundamentals,
and you practice that.
You do that over and over again because
those are the things you do all the
time when you're playing the piano.
Similarly,
we're going to talk today about
those things that you do all the
time when you're working with EOF.
And get started by playing with
those things rather than trying
to sit down at the piano for the
first time and muddle through that.
That's easy.
I could do that.
Okay, enough with that.
Now let's move on and
let's talk about why EOF.
What's the whole point here anyway?
So, from, we can look at EOF kind of
from two points of view.
One point being from the point of view
of I'm an object oriented programmer
or individual who thinks that way.
And then the point of view of I'm a
database kind of person and I'm not
really sure about all this OO stuff.
So let's start talking from
the object perspective.
Just a brief review.
We have different types
of things called classes.
Each of those classes stores
different pieces of information,
instance variables, state,
however we want to put it.
In addition, each one holds on to
certain amounts of logic.
Okay, canonical description of an object.
But the big question being,
where do objects sleep at night?
What happens when I need to,
if it's a desktop application,
Cocoa application, I need to,
the user logs out or
shuts down the computer.
What happens if I need to
recycle an app on my server?
What happens if the power
goes out in California?
And suddenly I've lost all
the state in my object.
So I need somewhere to put that.
And I could put it in a flat file, right?
Serialize it out, archive it,
have it all written out
as some big text file.
But once you get over a
certain number of objects,
that gets to be ridiculous.
So you need some place to stick the data.
And boy,
a database seems like a pretty good idea.
That's what they made them for.
And so it actually turns out that
in sticking information or object
related information into a database,
it actually turns out to
be a pretty good match.
Of course, we have types of things
in our object model,
maps to tables in the database.
You've heard this probably at least seven
times in each session so far because
actually this mapping is the key to EOF.
This is the first fundamental thing
that you need to be thinking about.
And also, of course,
we have columns in the database that
hold different types of information and
it maps so well to instance variables.
And then each row in the database
maps amazingly well to an instance
of an object of a particular class.
So that's good for everything except
for types that are more complex
than a string or a number or a date.
How do I hook up things
that are complex objects?
And we know that in Java we have
an object that is referencing
another complicated object.
It's not a pointer, mind you.
Although we can get
null pointer exceptions,
which boggles my mind.
I don't understand that at all.
It's just a point to a
unique place in memory,
a reference if you will,
but not a pointer.
Wouldn't do to have that.
In fact,
in the database it actually works
out almost identically how it works.
Each row has a unique primary key.
And then in another table,
a row has a place to store the value of
the unique primary key called a join.
In the world of entity
relationship modeling,
from mapping that object
to relational model,
we call this a relationship.
So the point of EOF is to go
from a row to an object and back.
How hard could that be?
Now, what is an Enterprise Object anyway?
We hear this term bandied
about all the time.
Well,
We affectionately call them EOs or
just because we don't want to say
Enterprise Object all the time.
All that it really is is it's an object
that implements a certain interface,
the EO Enterprise Object Interface
strangely enough.
Although you would not want to go and
implement that interface yourself.
That would be akin to you getting
up tomorrow morning and saying,
"You know,
I think I'm going to invent this
round thing today that people can use
to roll on." Or something like that.
Maybe I'll call it a wheel.
Yeah, that would be a good idea.
Don't reimplement the wheel.
You subclass EO Generic Record.
So it's all done for you.
All that that does, essentially,
is it allows these objects to work
with the Enterprise Object Framework
and persist in the database.
Now, why do I bring this up?
Because if you're looking through the
documentation or the class browser,
you will see a lot of the methods.
Take arguments or return values
of type EO Enterprise Object.
So, what's the difference?
So that's from the object perspective.
From the database perspective,
having taught folks over the years,
I can tell you that EOF can
freak a DBA out completely.
They go, because as was mentioned
in previous sessions,
they, you don't have to write any SQL.
When you get the objects
into your application,
there's no primary key,
there's no foreign key.
It's kind of like your
entire world is a DBA.
You've been abstracted from it, and it,
that would freak me out too.
So, as you start working seriously
on WebObjects applications
and you are working with DBAs,
don't get cheesed off at them because
they are coming from a different place.
And be very patient with them
because this is kind of like...
Actually, it's a lot like getting dropped
in the middle of a foreign country
where you don't speak the language
and things are completely different
and everything you're used to
is not quite there anymore.
And even worse yet,
it's all kind of right there and you
could get to it if you wanted to,
but you're not supposed to.
So you stick data in a database.
You can also put logic in a database.
Most database vendors have devised some
procedural language you can store in
the database called a stored procedure.
Let's talk about EOF and how it
can add value or what it does
in relationship to a database.
So one is distributed processing.
If I have a big website,
a big -- I don't want to put all
my logic in my one database because
in addition to fetching and saving
changes back to the database,
it's processing all this stuff so
I can offload the processing to one
or multiple WebObjects applications.
Second thing I can do is write
my logic in standard Java.
I don't have to learn Oracle's
brand of some procedural thing.
Dynamically generated SQL,
as has been kind of testified
to by a couple of folks up here,
they didn't know SQL all that well.
And to tell you the truth,
I could not write a well-formed
SQL statement right now if you
paid me a large sum of money.
I'd have to check some documentation.
Why?
Because using WebObjects in
EOF for the past few years,
I haven't needed to.
And it's always done the job for me.
One very,
very nice thing in EOF is the ability
to connect to multiple data sources.
From the point of view of your code,
you don't even necessarily care
where those objects came from,
where those rows came from.
You're very nicely abstracted from
the idea of multiple data sources.
Finally, you get a separate scratch
pad for every user.
So if you can imagine an application
where a lot of people are fetching
information or looking at information
and they want to maybe try a change.
Okay, I'm going to update this number and
see how it affects related numbers.
Well, if you just have a database,
the only place you can store
that change is in the database
and then you have people writing
and overwriting over each other,
which is a bad thing.
So in EOF,
you have a place where each user can make
edits without affecting anybody else.
It's like a little alternate
universe where you fetch in
information and you can literally
make changes to that information,
a little context to do editing,
if you will.
How'd that name pop into my head?
That is another very
useful thing about EOF.
In fact, so useful, let's talk about that
editing context for a while.
The EO Editing Context
class is the class.
It's like your go-to guy.
If you want to do anything related
to all the basics of database access,
you're going to be talking
to the editing context.
If you want to fetch from the database,
you make up an object that
specifies what you want and you
hand it to the editing context,
you say, "Go get it." If you want to
Insert objects.
You make a new one,
you hand it to the editing context,
you say, here,
I want to stick this into the database
the next time we save our changes back.
If you want to, well,
I've been watching The Sopranos a lot,
if you want to whack an object,
you're going to take an object
that you've already fetched in
and you tell the editing context,
hey, I don't want,
I want this thing gone.
I want to delete it.
And it also,
when you're changing objects,
you don't even have to do anything.
The editing context is just watching.
Just sitting there saying, okay,
you made a change.
I gotcha.
It's a very nice thing.
And then at the end of the day,
when you've done all your edits,
you have the choice either to chuck them,
revert the editing context,
or save all of those changes in one
big transaction down to the database.
Editing context, very important.
Now, we're going to see some code.
We're going to walk through each
of these and I'll show you how to
programmatically do all of these items.
Now I brought up the
display group earlier,
the WoW display group,
which is an object that sits
on top of an editing context.
And all of the magic that you've seen,
right, with dragging things up,
things are being fetched automatically,
they're all happening.
They've all been happening because
a display group has been talking to
the real power behind the scenes,
the editing context.
And so all of the methods that
you see here are essentially what
the display group magically has
been sending the editing context.
There really is,
when you start to look at it,
not really so much magic,
it just really looks that way because
the whole system is put together so well.
So let's get into it.
So fetching.
When you start doing some
fetching in WebObjects,
you will find that there are
many techniques for fetching.
We've seen a couple already.
One is using a display group to fetch.
In the prior presentation,
there was a method from EO Utilities,
a convenience method for fetching.
We're going to see two ways
to fetch in this presentation.
No matter which technique we use,
there's still a canonical
thing that always happens,
and that's what we're
going to go through,
the canonical longhand way.
It's kind of like I'm going
to teach you long division,
and then after that,
I'm going to give you a calculator.
So, first you create a FET spec.
A FET specification,
we'll see in a moment,
just specifies what
I want from the database.
I have to get hold of an editing
context conveniently enough
in a WebObjects application.
Every user has a session and every
session has access to or can lazily
create a default editing context.
So it's very easy to get hold of one.
And then I tell the editing context,
"Hey, here's a FET specification.
Go get me the objects that match
this." The editing context does the
work of talking to its friends at the
lower levels in the Enterprise Objects
Framework and you get back EOs.
And what you get back is an array
of retrieved Enterprise Objects.
And you have a choice.
You can either,
then you have this array and you
can manage that array yourself so
if you're adding new objects to
the editing context you might also
want to stick them in that array.
If you're deleting objects from
the editing context you might
want to remove them from the array
so that when you display that
array everything looks copacetic.
That is something actually that
a display group handles for you.
All right.
So let's do a fetch specification.
What are we going to
get from the database?
Well, the first thing we need to tell
it is what kind of thing are
we getting from the database?
The entity name.
It's just a string.
It's the name of the entity in the model.
What table are we fetching against,
basically?
The next thing is something
called a qualifier,
which is just a description.
It's basically an OO description of
the criteria of what we're looking for.
And then finally,
an array of sort orderings.
And sort orderings
always travel in a pack.
They, you never find a lone one.
They're always together in an array.
And they determine what
we're going to sort on.
If you are a DBA, that's wonderful,
because I don't know any SQL and you
optimize my database and that's great.
This is very analogous to the
where clause in a SQL statement
and the order by clause,
the qualifier and the sort orderings.
So a qualifier is basically
an object-oriented way of
describing a bunch of criteria.
So the phrase,
I'm looking for employees whose
salary is greater than 5,000,
and their last name begins with a J.
Well, EO qualifier is a super class,
and it has all of these subclasses.
Some of them are for
concatenating things together,
like an and qualifier.
We also have or and not.
All the good ones.
EO key value qualifier is where we put
things like salary is greater than 5,000.
And then we put in a number,
which is 5,000.
Now, it would be a real pain in the butt
if I had to go and build all these
objects and hook them up myself.
So even in the longhand canonical way,
there's a slightly easier way to do that.
It's a method called qualifier
with qualifier format.
And essentially what it takes,
it's a lot like a printf string in C,
where you give it a string with a couple
of placeholders or formatting characters,
percentage at sign,
and the second argument is an
array of arguments that are gonna
get plugged in to the blanks.
It's like a programmatic madlib.
And so essentially what happens in
this code example is we make an array,
we make an object, integer 5,000,
add an object that's a string,
and then we call that method
and create a new qualifier.
And what this code is going to
create is this object graph.
[Transcript missing]
So how do we make them?
Well, we make an array,
usually a mutable one so
we can add stuff to it.
And then we make new EO sort orderings.
The name of the property or
key that we're sorting on.
And then there are static variables
in EO sort ordering class that
define the ways we can sort.
Compare ascending, compare descending.
And then we have case insensitive
versions of those for when
we're doing string compares.
Then we build the fetch spec.
We assume in this case that we
already have an array of orderings.
We already have the qualifier.
We use a three argument constructor
to create a fetch spec and give
it the pieces of info it needs:
the entity name,
the qualifier of what we want,
and the array of sort orderings.
If you want to get everything back
from the table in an unsorted way,
you could build a spetch fetchification.
A fetch specification that takes
null for the last two arguments.
And then finally doing the fetch,
we get a hold of some editing
context and again the session has
one that we use as the default.
Just any old editing context just
happens to be stored in the session.
We can ask the session for
its default editing context.
And we send the long
but descriptive method,
objects with fetch specification.
We hand it the specification,
we get back an array of objects.
The hard part is not fetching.
The hard part is building the
specification of what you want.
Actually that's sometimes true
in software development as well.
Think about that when you go home.
Okay, there's an easier way.
The graphical Fetch Spec Builder
that's part of EO Modeler.
This I think is,
when I saw this I just leapt for joy.
It was a very happy day because
I didn't have to write all of this
code to build a Fetch specification.
Everything that I did in code
I could now do in the model.
And so I can graphically create and we
will see a demo of that in a little bit.
We can create the qualifier
this way including building
complex ANDs and ORs and NOTs.
And we can also build sort orderings
this way so that we can not have
to make that array ourselves.
We can just do it in a tool.
Very nice.
Now, when you build a qualifier, however,
usually you don't want to always get
people whose salary is greater than five
thousand whose first name starts with J.
You usually want the user to type
in some input so you can do a fetch.
Otherwise it's a really boring app.
So, in this graphical fetch spec builder,
there's something a little sneaky.
Actually it's very cool.
Called qualifier bindings.
I can, instead of typing out a literal
thing that I'm qualifying against,
I can put in that graphical fetch spec
something that reads something like
last name like dollar sign last name.
And that dollar sign last name is a
variable that's going to get replaced at
run time with whatever the user typed in.
Now I take that ingredient,
which again is kind of like a
fetch spec with some blanks in it.
And how am I going to
fill those items in?
Well, you kind of got the answer
already because it's on the slide.
An NSDictionary that
holds keys and values.
The key in the dictionary that
matches that dollar sign variable.
I stick those two together
and whatever the value is
gets substituted in and voila.
voila, I have my fully formed qualifier.
which is very very nifty.
Now how do I do all this tomfoolery?
Well,
I can use a graphical fetch spec using
an EO utility in one line of code.
I heartily recommend this as one of the
best ways to fetch programmatically.
So, we have an editing context
we've already gotten a hold of,
probably from this session.
We have this dictionary of values,
just calling it a query dictionary.
And this method, objects with fetch
specification and bindings,
that's a static method of
the EO utilities class.
We handed the editing
context we're going to use,
the name of the entity we're fetching,
the name of the fetch spec in the model,
and then finally the dictionary
of stuff that's going to
get filled into the blanks.
It's going to build
the qualifier for you,
fill in the blanks, build the fetch spec,
tell the editing context,
"Go get me those objects with that
fetch specification." Get back the
array and hand it back to the EO.
Creating and inserting.
It's actually very, very simple to do.
It's a two-step process that a
utility lets you do in one step.
You need to create an
object and insert an object,
as this slide kind of gives away.
You make a new object,
and you can make as many
enterprise objects as you want,
and they will never end up in the
database unless you insert them into an
editing context and save the changes.
What this looks like is,
what Line of Code does,
create an insert instance,
is you hand it an editing context,
the name of the entity you
want to make a new one of,
and it will...
Make a new one,
stick it in the editing context,
ready to be saved.
And then you will also get back
a reference to that new object so
you can do what other wonderful
things you'd like to do with it.
Editing is the easiest.
One of the wonderful things
about EOF is that you get to
use your objects like objects.
If I want to set and retrieve values,
I can use accessor methods.
And as I'm using those accessor methods,
they are automatically being watched,
those changes, by the editing context.
So that the next time I save changes,
the most recent data gets
put back into the database.
I also bring up key value coding.
This has come up, I think,
in every session as part of the
fundamental magic of web objects in EOF.
I would say, just as a pointer,
because we are not going
to get into it here,
that understanding
Key-value coding and dictionaries,
especially NS-mutable dictionaries
where you can add and remove things,
are probably two very key things
to the zen of EOF and WebObjects.
So, further research for you all.
The idea though is basically in
key-value coding it's just an
interface that declares instead
of always having to write two
accessor methods for every property,
set name, get name, set salary,
get salary.
You know, you have 37 properties,
you end up with, what's that, six, 74,
74 accessor methods.
Let's have two.
And we just pass in the name of
the property we're trying to get
and set as a parameter rather than
hard coding it as a method name.
That is what key-value coding is,
which also means that as I'm using
objects that implement key-value
coding and all the good ones do,
um,
I'm able to treat them and get and
set values in them in a very generic
way which is really very much at the
core of why we can do all the cool,
fun, drag-and-drop,
easy stuff that we saw yesterday.
And then finally, deleting.
If you want to get rid of an EO,
it's very simple.
You call on your friend the
editing context and you say,
"Delete this object." And it'll
put it on the hit list.
That thing is going to be gone
the next time you save changes.
So we've seen what?
For fetching, inserting, updating,
and deleting, we've seen about, what,
five lines of code.
Very difficult stuff.
Now all of those changes are just
hanging out in that little scratch
pad in that editing context.
They're not in the database,
they're not bothering anybody else.
And in fact,
to start from the bottom of the slide,
if that user say hit a cancel
button on your web page,
you could in that action method
tell the editing context to revert.
Revert, throw out all those changes.
All those things you inserted and
changed and were ready to delete,
just chuck that all.
We're reverting.
Um, or...
[Transcript missing]
Alright,
that is the fundamental way that we
deal with EOF using an editing context.
Now I'd like to bring out
Mark Respass or up Mark Respass,
demogod extraordinaire who is going
to be walking us through a sample
app that does all of these things.
Mark.
Mark Respass: Thank you.
Oh, I'll do this one.
Mark Respass: Am I on?
Yeah.
Everyone hear me alright?
It's really bright up here.
Okay, um... What we're going to do
is start with the browser.
I've written a small application,
so I'm going to start in the
opposite way that I usually do demos
and show the application first.
So, as you've heard so much about CRUD,
that's what this application does.
We have a small database of songs.
It allows me to search on these songs.
I can add songs, I can inspect the song,
and I can delete it.
So we've got a couple of fields here,
song name and price.
Of course, if I leave those blank,
as James said, when you want to fetch
all of your objects,
you pass null for the qualifier
and null for the sort orderings,
and you just get back all the objects.
I can of course do searches for a
particular song and this one is set up
to do greater than or equal to a price.
So pretty simple stuff.
I can add a song here.
I've got a few pop-up buttons
with some preset categories.
Maybe we can take rock
and Charles Mingus.
I can see Mingus doing
some rock and dirt,
a little collaboration
with Alice in Chains.
Come back in our research and
now we've got that same song.
I can hit the delete button because it
turns out Mingus doesn't want to do that.
And I can inspect any song
and make a change to it.
So you can see I actually have an
mp3 of this file on my home computer
but since this isn't my computer,
let's delete it so that doesn't work.
And we can go back, take a look at it.
Of course, I can hit cancel and
that reverts the changes.
So if I were to make a lot of changes
and clear out all these fields,
hit cancel.
That simply invokes revert
on the editing context.
So how do I do that?
How do we do that?
Starting with search.
big font.
Starting with the search method,
as James described, there's lots of ways
that you can do this.
You can write all of the code.
You can create your fetch specification
through by creating your and qualifier.
In this case, we've got two fields.
I'd have to create two
EOK value qualifiers,
take an array of those,
and pass them to an and qualifier,
and make that.
Create my sort orderings,
create my fetch specification,
pass all that to the editing context,
and ask it to return all the objects.
Or I can just use the, you know.
The big font.
Hold on.
I can just ask it to the ER utilities
method to do the fetch for me.
Objects with fetch
specification and bindings,
given an editing context,
the name of an entity,
the name of my fetch spec,
and the query dictionary.
So I'm going to talk a bit about the
graphical fetch specs in EOModeler.
Because as James was
going through all that,
you can see it can get pretty complicated
creating all of these EO key value
qualifiers for every field that you had.
You potentially would have
a whole bunch of fields in a
more complicated application.
You'd have to create all
these key value qualifiers.
So EOModeler makes it really
easy to create these graphically.
And you can see here I've got song name,
case insensitive like song name,
and cost greater than or equal to cost.
What I'm going to do is add a couple
of fields in here to do more searches.
So I'd like to be able
to search by artist.
Oh wait, let me double check.
Yeah, by artist.
I've conveniently written
some code in here already.
So I add an and qualifier and I'm
going to click on to artist equals
[Transcript missing]
toCategory equals Category.
What's going to be interesting
about this is that for the artist,
I'm just binding the
toArtist relationship.
If you remember, in the custom EO,
you can see that toArtist is a
method on song that returns an artist
object or an EO Enterprise object
referring to the artist table.
But I'm only asking it for this
particular object here in the fetch spec.
For Category,
I'm looking at the actual Category
field in the Category field.
category table,
so I can put a string in there.
In my WebObjects template,
I've got this query dictionary and I've
got it bound up to song name and cost,
two fields in my song table.
I'm going to add a row for the category.
I'm putting in a field and I'm going to
bind up my query dictionary using the
"Variables I specified in my fetch spec.
So query dictionary, dictionary,
and then I'm going to
add a row below that."
for the artist because i conveniently
already put in a couple of variables
I've got this artist display group.
You may remember in previous sessions
where they discussed the display group.
You can configure it for a particular
table or a particular entity.
And this one is for the artist table.
I've got it set to fetch on load,
sorted by artist name.
So it's going to fetch
all of the artists.
I'm going to bind the
displayed objects to the list.
I've got an artist object
in here for the item.
I'd like to display the artist.artistName
And then I've got a selection.
In the selection, I'm going to bind query
dictionary.artist.
Because what's interesting about
this is that the pop-up button
doesn't give you back a string
which is the name of the artist.
It gives you back an
actual artist object.
I happen to be displaying in the
display string the artist name,
but the object, the thing I'm getting
back is an artist object.
So I can pass that particular
artist into my fetch spec and say,
for the relationship to the artist,
find all the songs that
match that relationship.
If I go back in here and recompile
to get the changes for my model,
I'll get these two new fields in here,
they'll let me search.
I don't have to write any more code
in order to get these and out of
the thousand demos that I've done,
I always seem to forget one
binding in this pop-up button,
which is the no selection string.
fetch again and refreshing this page
now I can select so I can select setting
that to none I get all artists I get
all the songs by Alice in Chains all
the songs that begin with see in this
case nothing nothing is found so it's
really easy to add this up and add these
things into your fetch specification
using EO modeler you don't have to write
any new code it's all getting set up
with my query dictionary let's take a
look in a little more detail at how this
is getting done I have a query dictionary
which is an NF mutable dictionary
which I initialize in the constructor
And I bound up these keys:
query dictionary dot cost,
which is a field in my song table,
and this one, the selection is query
dictionary dot artist,
and those all match what's in the
fetch specification in EOModeler.
So, and during the request response loop,
when WebAuth just goes through this page,
it's going to go into each
one of those forms and say,
I've got query dictionary song name,
so it's going to look,
set the song name key,
and take the value out of
that field and put it in.
And remember,
in an intramutable dictionary,
for anyone who doesn't know,
the method is set object for key,
so it'll set that, the value,
to song name for the key song name,
but if song name doesn't exist,
it will create a key song name
and set that value in there.
And in fact, if these are null,
if I were to leave one out,
it will actually remove it
as part of key value coding,
which is how I'm able to do a fetch.
I can say,
put in two here and find all of these.
L greater than or equal to.
I don't know what match is found.
If we can make a change to that
and I don't keep all the fields
that were in my query dictionary.
So I also have debugging
on on this application.
Oh, and if we look at the
query dictionary here,
you can see that this is actually
an artist that was selected,
and you get an artist object.
And I have debugging on where
you can see that the SQL being
generated is the artist ID.
And EOF is able to say,
find me the artist that matches.
Get its primary key out.
Match that up with the foreign
key that's in the song table.
And do the query that way.
So the SQL is being generated for me,
but I don't have to deal with it.
I can just deal with the objects.
So that was the search method.
A couple of other things.
I can add a song.
So we went through and
I hit the add song button.
It brings up this other page.
What happens with that?
If I want to add a song,
I use the method that James mentioned,
create and insert instance,
pass it the editing
context that I'm using,
the session's default
editing context in this case,
and the name of the entity
I want to get an object back,
which is a song entity.
I have a method here,
edit page with song,
because I'm actually using
the same component to edit new
objects and edit existing objects.
So I have edit page with song,
which simply sets the song
to the song that I return and
sets the return page to this,
which is why when I come
back after creating a song,
my page looks the same.
Passing this to the next page,
I can return that woe component
and I get the page back in
the same state it was in,
which for this demo
worked out well for me.
If I were to edit a song,
I simply pass it the song that I have.
And this is part of some of
the magic of WoW repetition.
The WoW repetition allows me to
select one of the songs in that array,
in the table,
and it will set the song variable
automatically to the one that I selected.
I don't have to go through
and figure out what it is.
The song variable gets
set to the one I selected.
If I delete,
The same sort of thing happens.
It automatically sets the song
instance variable to the object
that I selected in the row.
And then I, as James was talking about,
if you were to manage
this array yourself,
I remove the object from the array,
ask the editing context
to delete the song,
which just marks it for deletion,
and then when changes are saved,
the editing context saves the changes,
deletes those objects.
Taking a look at the edit page,
The save song method on
here is again very simple.
I ask the editing context to save
changes and I return the page that I set.
Now, you might wonder where are
these changes coming from,
where is it getting all these values?
I can take a song object,
you can see all the
instance variables here,
and I can bind them directly
to fields on the form.
I can also bind them to the
selection for pop-up buttons,
so for each one of these pop-ups
I have the object that was
selected in the pop-up set to the,
for the song binding.
So I've got song to album and
I can bind these up directly.
Hitting Save saves the changes.
Hitting Cancel invokes revert
on the editing context.
So I just want to try a couple more.
Oh, I forgot about the clock.
We have plenty of time.
All right.
So there's more things that we can do.
I didn't specify any sort orderings yet.
So I can specify sort
orderings that maybe I'd like
to sort these by artist name.
And we can specify
ascending or descending,
case insensitive or case sensitive.
I believe that this is pretty
much if you have Alice in Chains
with a capital A or a lowercase a,
they show up in two different places.
We'd like them to all
be grouped together.
So, case insensitive, sort ascending,
you can sort by song name.
and last maybe do the category.
And there are a number of other
things that you can do in here.
You can set prefetching,
which you might find out
about in some of the advanced
sessions you can do raw fetches and
actually get back raw rows rather than
getting back Enterprise Objects you
just get back a dictionary of raw Rows.
You can set options like
fetch distinct rows,
I think it's the only SQL I know.
Select distinct, well, you know,
that sort of thing.
We select distinct.
If all of this worked out into
some SQL that could be figured out,
then SQL would be set here.
So we can see already that
SQL is being generated,
but EOModeler isn't
really able to figure out,
"I've got an artist object.
How does that relate to SQL?" That's
part of what EOF is doing for us.
So now we've got some sort orderings,
we've got qualifiers,
we're working across relationships
because EOs know about relationships.
Lots of database access
frameworks don't somehow,
they forgot about relationships,
the relational part of
the relational database.
But with an EO, if I have a song,
a song knows about its album,
it knows about its artist,
it knows about its category,
but it only knows about
it when we need to get it.
When we ask for the artist,
that's when it goes and gets it.
So now that we've got some
sort orderings in there,
I'll recompile,
get my model back into my application.
I'll bring my application
back and now when I fetch,
all these should be sorted.
There we go.
So if we just sort by,
fetch all the objects in here,
now they're sorted by artist, song name,
and category.
So we've got all these different songs,
Dave Holland, something James Dempsey,
I don't know what the Fetch Spec song is.
And that's,
I think that's pretty much it.
We've got sort orderings,
we can use EOF to do all this,
our EO modeler to create
our Fetch Spec graphically.
James?
Thank you very much, Mark.
Let's give him a round of applause.
And if we switch back two slides.
Awesome.
So the first time
I wrote a WebObjects app,
it was a little,
small app to exercise EOF,
actually very similar to
this with one addition.
It was something that kept track of
how many times MacOS Rumors was right.
And so I wrote a little code that went
out and grabbed the HTML from their site,
parsed through their tags,
pulled out the heading of each
story and the story itself,
stuck it in a database using EOF.
And I went through and picked a
date of when I would check back to
see if that rumor was true or not.
And every morning, because I don't know,
just kind of an Apple watcher,
I guess I would go in and check
that out and 20% is about the ratio.
But that was usually on things that were
going to happen tomorrow or the next day,
you know.
But I highly recommend starting out with
EOF writing a small app of this nature
that exercises those basic functions.
Write one or two.
The practice is good.
Keep it very simple.
It's actually one of
the best ways to learn.
The magic still, this EO editing context,
it does all this stuff.
I just get back this array of objects.
Somehow there's SQL being generated.
Who's doing what?
What's going on here?
Well, we're going to take kind of the
nickel tour of the EOF stack,
of the EO access framework and the
EO control framework to show how
we go from a row to an EO and back.
Now we'll start with EO Access and
EO Access is something where you don't,
for starters at least,
do things programmatically.
You configure EO Access using EO Modeler.
EO Access,
actually I'm going to jump back a slide.
Oh, maybe.
There we go.
EO Access is responsible for
the connection to the database.
It's responsible for turning those
raw rows into enterprise objects.
It's responsible for doing that
object relational mapping and
it does so with the help or
the assistance of a model file.
We don't really mess around
in EO Access that much except
that the EO Utilities class,
with all those utility methods,
is part of the EO Access Framework.
So when you're looking in EO Control,
the documentation,
and can't for the life of you find
out where this EO Utilities is,
it's because it's in EO Access.
EO Control, as we've seen,
is where we control things.
We have an editing context.
We fetch, insert, update, delete.
That's where we are in control.
That's what EO Control is for.
So again, we don't programmatically
touch EO access that much.
We've seen what EOModeler does,
has the connection information of
what database we're hooking up to,
and has that
object-to-relational mapping.
Without a model file,
EOF is just going to sit there.
It's not going to
connect to a darn thing.
So the EO Access Framework
has actually two layers that
we're going to talk about.
One is called the adapter layer.
And the adapter layer,
currently the JDBC adapter, is going to,
is the part of the framework that
is sending SQL to the database,
it's generating the SQL,
particular to that database.
It is also maintaining the
connection through the database.
It is dealing entirely in raw row data.
It has never heard of
an enterprise object.
It's dealing entirely in
just the rows that come back.
When it gets them back,
it hands them up to the database layer.
And the database layer has
two very important jobs,
kind of two raisons d'tre.
As one would say if one had
a very poor French accent.
The two things that the database
layer does is first of all its job
is to turn that raw row into an EO.
It's kind of like Pinocchio
becoming a real boy.
It was just a plain
behaviorless bunch of data.
Now it's an enterprise object that
represents the logic of your business.
The second thing that it does is it
takes a snapshot of the data that came
in from the database and stores it.
And it holds onto it, one,
so we can cache and so EOF might save
itself a trip to the database later
because it already has the information.
We already went to the database.
And it also holds onto it so that when we
save those changes we're able to check,
"Hey, did somebody change that
row out from under us?
What were the values when we first
fetched those items?" Those are
called snapshots and as you go
more and more into EOF you'll
learn more and more about them.
I just wanted to point them out.
And let you know where they lived.
So once things are out
of the access framework,
they're fully formed EOs,
the snapshot's been taken,
and we move on to EO control.
Oh, one more thing.
I mentioned earlier that multiple data
sources was something that EOF did very,
very well.
And in fact it's so arduous to
set up a second data source.
What you do is you make
a second model file.
You add that model file to your project.
And as you are fetching using
entities in both models,
EOF will automatically come up with the
objects to connect to both databases.
And both of those are going
to be fetching raw rows,
turning them into EOs, and the like.
A note, not all databases are orange.
I should have picked a
different color to distinguish.
It's also important to note,
I did not get a chance to change this,
that really that whole row,
that whole line is the database lake.
What EOF is doing is making a couple
of objects in each layer for each
connection down to a data source.
But again, the takeaway,
add another model that connects
to another data source,
you're connecting to
multiple data sources.
The rest is handled pretty
automatically by EOF.
Now, you may come across this object
class called the EO Model Group.
It lives, it exists because we can have
multiple models and so we have an
object that manages those models.
That's what its job is.
Those are kind of the big ticket
items of what's going on in EO Access.
Now let's go through.
So we've gotten these things
up out of the database.
We have multiple data sources
we might be connecting to.
And how are we going to control
what SQL gets sent here,
what SQL gets sent there,
customers live over here,
something else lives over here?
Well, we have kind of a traffic cop in
the EO control framework called
the Object Store Coordinator.
You'll run across this as you're
reading the documentation.
You don't talk to the
Object Store Coordinator programmatically
all that often.
It's just nice to know that the OSC is
there just directing traffic for you.
And then on top of the
Object Star Coordinator is
the thing we're familiar with,
the editing context.
So I wanted to just show you how things
get from the database and who are
the players along the way so that you
don't think it's just magic and I don't
understand exactly what's going on.
This is pretty much
the grand tour of EOF.
And of course we can have
different editing contexts by
default one per user session.
And they're all talking through
the same object store coordinator.
They're all using that same model.
They're all sharing the snapshots
stored at the database layer.
And they're all connecting
through the adapter layer.
So that is the big ol'
walkthrough of EOF.
Now, um,
Let's review.
So, well actually,
I wrote a little song about it, so.
[Transcript missing]
So how many object persistence
frameworks in the world are there
that people enjoy using so much that
they write a little song about them?
[Transcript missing]
EOF is a software-based software that
allows you to specify the objects you
want to fetch as its name implies.
With a fetch spec you can stipulate those
objects you want to fetch and manipulate.
[Transcript missing]
Fitch, spec,
baby you can stimulate those
objects   You want to fetch and
manipulate  Everybody sing along!
Fitch, spec, it helps you
[Transcript missing]
So, first time on stage, huh?
Playing guitar.
It was pretty noticeable too.
So,
if you guys ever want a repeat of this,
let us know.
And in case you didn't notice,
James is also on stage inside the
classroom on almost a weekly basis?
A little less, but yeah.
Okay.
So, if you want a little bit more
information from him regarding EOF and
other pieces of our technology,
you can sign up for a WebObjects class.
Great.
Thank you.
Go to the WebObjects lab and build one
of these apps like Mark showed you.
It will be very good.
And roadmap.
We didn't talk a lot about using
EOModeler here because data modeling
and connectivity is all about that,
which is groovy.
Advanced Enterprise Objects Framework
is going to be an awesome session.
I'm going to be there because
I love just always hearing more.
And the feedback forum.
And with that, who to contact?
Looks familiar from every other session.